## The client-side

The term client-side refers to software that is run on the same computer that is making a request to the server-side and this usually means a web browser like Chrome. As per the final part of the previous section the term ***client*** really refers to any computer that is making a request.

The client-side is an interesting domain because the software actually runs in and is supported by a wider software environment provided by a browser application itself. What this means is that your client-side software is decoupled from the Operating System of your computer (although some browsers provide limited access to it) and so in theory the software should be able to run on any device. Similar approaches are taken for some server-side technologies for example Java running in the Java Virtual Machine (we'll start talking about particular programming languages and their features in the next chapter.) In practice however the various different browser suppliers offer subtly different features and adhere to the various standards in different ways and so writing code that is cross-browser compatible becomes a real concern for many organisations.

Javascript is the exclusive language of the client-side, again in the name of portability. Though various higher level languages are available they must ultimately go through some process to convert them to Javascript.

As we mentioned in the previous section the first port of call in handling a request from a user's browser to a typical web application is a server. That server will likely be responsible for returning the client-side code itself, to be run within the browser.

At the risk of jumping ahead slightly, Mozilla (the company behind the Firefox browser) provides a really excellent [Javascript Reference](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference). Particularly of interest at this point is that for each part of the Javascript language there is a browser compatibility section detailing to what extent it is supported in various browsers. For example see the the entry for the `Array` property [`length`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Array/length).

The Mozilla browser compatibility section also gives an idea of the range of browsers out there. At the time of writing the list includes Google Chrome, Microsoft Edge, Microsoft Internet Explorer, Mozilla's Firefox, Apple's Safari and Opera.

A special mention must be made of Internet Explorer which is rather infamous in the Software Engineering community and tends to be the butt of jokes (another key aim of this book is to allow you to at least understand various nerdy jokes you may hear around the office, if not actually laugh at them.) IE has been around for many years but as client-side standards have developed over that time, for reasons best understood by Microsoft, it has tended to lag significantly behind and as such has gained a reputation. Software Engineers of a certain vintage may remember the uncomfortable feeling of being asked, "does it work in IE 6?"

Just to illustrate the point refer to the Mozilla reference for [Javascript Promises](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Promise) (these are an advanced language feature for asynchronous programming which will be discussed in the next chapter.) In the table of different Promise features and whether they are supported by each browser a firm "No" will be seen in each row of the Internet Explorer column. This trend seems to be reversing with Microsoft Edge, the Windows 10 successor to IE.
